---
layout: post
title: MIT OCW 6.042J Problem Set 1
---
### Problem 1. [24 points]

Translate the following sentences from English to predicate logic. The domain that you are working over is $X$, the set of people. You may use the functions $S(x)$, meaning that “x has been a student of 6.042,” $A(x)$, meaning that “x has gotten an ‘A’ in 6.042,” $T(x)$, meaning that “x is a TA of 6.042,” and $E(x, y)$, meaning that “x and y are the same person.”

1. [6 pts] There are people who have taken 6.042 and have gotten A’s in 6.042
	
	**Solution**: $ \exists x \in X. S(x) \land A(x) $
	
2. [6 pts] All people who are 6.042 TA’s and have taken 6.042 got A’s in 6.042
	
	**Solution**: $ \forall x. T(x) \land S(x) \rightarrow A(x) $
	
3. [6 pts] There are no people who are 6.042 TA’s who did not get A’s in 6.042.
	
	**Solution**: $ \neg ( \exists x. T(x) \land ( \neg A(x) ) ) $
	
4. [6 pts] There are at least three people who are TA’s in 6.042 and have not taken 6.042
	
	**Solution**: 
	$$ \exists x, y, z. \neg E(x,y) \land \neg E(x,z) \land \neg E(y,z) \land T(x) \land T(y) \land T(z) \land \neg S(x) \land \neg S(y) \land \neg S(z) $$


### Problem 2. [24 points]

Use a truth table to prove or disprove the following statements:

1. [12 pts] $ \neg (P \lor (Q \land R)) = (\neg P) \land ( \neg Q \lor \neg R) $
	
	**Solution**: Prove by truth table:

	$$
	\begin{array}{ccc|c|c}
		P & Q & R & \neg (P \lor (Q \land R)) & (\neg P) \land ( \neg Q \lor \neg R) \\
		\hline
		T & T & T & F & F \\
		T & T & F & F & F \\
		T & F & T & F & F \\
		T & F & F & F & F \\
		F & T & T & F & F \\
		F & T & F & T & T \\
		F & F & T & T & T \\
		F & F & F & T & T
	\end{array}
	$$
	
	So $ \neg (P \lor (Q \land R)) = (\neg P) \land ( \neg Q \lor \neg R) \quad\blacksquare $
	
2. [12 pts] $ \neg (P \land (Q \lor R)) = \neg P \lor (\neg Q \lor \neg R) $
	
	**Solution**: Disprove by truth table:
	
	$$
	\begin{array}{ccc|c|c}
		P & Q & R & \neg (P \land (Q \lor R)) & \neg P \lor (\neg Q \lor \neg R) \\
		\hline
		T & T & T & F & F \\
		T & T & F & F & T \\
		T & F & T & F & T \\
		T & F & F & T & T \\
		F & T & T & T & T \\
		F & T & F & T & T \\
		F & F & T & T & T \\
		F & F & F & T & T
	\end{array}
	$$
	
	So $ \neg (P \land (Q \lor R)) \neq \neg P \lor (\neg Q \lor \neg R)  \quad\blacksquare $


### Problem 3. [24 points]

The binary logical connectives $\land$ (and), $\lor$ (or), and $\rightarrow$ (implies) appear often in not only computer programs, but also everyday speech. In computer chip designs, however, it is considerably easier to construct these out of another operation, $nand$, which is simpler to represent in a circuit. Here is the truth table for $nand$ ($\uparrow$):

$$
\begin{array}{cc|c}
	P & Q & P\,nand\,Q \\
	\hline
	true & true & false \\
	true & false & true \\
	false & true & true \\
	false & false & true \\
\end{array}
$$

1. [12 pts] For each of the following expressions, find an equivalent expression using only $nand$ and $\neg$ (not), as well as grouping parentheses to specify the order in which the operations apply. You may use $A, B$, and the operators any number of times.
	1. $A \land B$
		
		**Solution**:  $A \land B \leftrightarrow \neg(\neg(A \land B)) \leftrightarrow \neg(A \uparrow B)$
		
	2. $A \lor B$
		
		**Solution**:  $A \lor B \leftrightarrow \neg(\neg A \land \neg B) \leftrightarrow \neg A \uparrow \neg B$
		
	3. $A \rightarrow B$
		
		**Solution**:  $A \rightarrow B \leftrightarrow \neg(A \land \neg B) \leftrightarrow A \uparrow \neg B $
		
2. [4 pts] It is actually possible to express each of the above using only $nand$, without needing to use $\neg$. Find an equivalent expression for $(\neg A)$ using only $nand$ and grouping parentheses.
	
	**Solution**:  $\neg A \leftrightarrow \neg(A \land A) \leftrightarrow A \uparrow A $

3. [8 pts] The constants $true$ and $false$ themselves may be expressed using only $nand$. Construct an expression using an arbitrary statement $A$ and $nand$ that evaluates to $true$ regardless of whether $A$ is $true$ or $false$. Construct a second expression that always evaluates to $false$. Do not use the constants $true$ and $false$ themselves in your statements.
	
	**Solution**: 
	$$ true \leftrightarrow A \lor \neg A \leftrightarrow \neg(\neg A \land A) \leftrightarrow A \uparrow A \uparrow A \\
	false \leftrightarrow \neg true \leftrightarrow (A \uparrow A \uparrow A) \uparrow (A \uparrow A \uparrow A) $$

### Problem 4. [10 points]

You have 12 coins and a balance scale, one of which is fake. All
the real coins weigh the same, but the fake coin weighs less than the rest. All the coins visually appear the same, and the difference in weight is imperceptible to your senses. In at most 3 weighings, give a strategy that detects the fake coin. (Note: the scale in this problem
is a scale with two dishes, which tips toward the side that is heavier. For clarification, do an image search for “balance scale”).

**Solution**:

1. split the coins into 3 piles, A, B and C, each has 4 coins. Weigh A and B, there will be 3 cases:
	1. $A > B$, then the fake coin must be in pile B.
	2. $A < B$, then the fake coin must be in pile A.
	3. $A = B$, then the fake coin must be in pile C.

2. take the pile with fake coin, split it into 1 coin D, 1 coin E and 2 coin pile F, weigh D and E, there will be 3 cases:
	1. $D > E$, then E is the fake coin.
	2. $D < E$, then D is the fake coin.
	3. $D = E$, then the fake coin must be in pile F.

3. if the fake coin is in pile F, split pile F into 1 coin G and 1 coin H, weigh G and H, the lighter one is the fake coin.


### Problem 5. [6 points]

Prove the following statement by proving its contrapositive: if $r$ is
irrational, then $r^\frac 15$ is irrational. (Be sure to state the contrapositive explicitly.)

**Solution**: We prove the contrapositive: if $r^\frac 15$ is rational, then $r$ is rational.

Assume $r^\frac 15$ is rational, then there exist integers $a$ and $b$ such that:

$$  r^\frac 15 = \frac ab$$

Raise both sides to the 5th power:

$$ (r^\frac 15)^5 = r = (\frac ab)^5 = \frac {a^5}{b^5} $$

Since $a^5$ and $b^5$ are both integers, r is also rational. $\quad\blacksquare$

### Problem 6. [12 points]

Suppose that $w^2 + x^2 + y^2 = z^2$, where $w$, $x$, $y$, and $z$ always denote positive integers. (Hint: It may be helpful to represent even integers as $2i$ and odd integers as $2j + 1$, where $i$ and $j$ are integers)

Prove the proposition: $z$ is even if and only if $w$, $x$, and $y$ are even. Do this by considering all the cases of $w$, $x$, $y$ being odd or even.

**Solution**: We prove $w$, $x$, and $y$ are even implies $z$ is even and vice-versa.

First, we show $w$, $x$, and $y$ are even implies $z$ is even.

$w$, $x$, and $y$ are all even, so we write them as $2i$, $2j$ and $2k$, then:

$$\begin{align}
	w^2 + x^2 + y^2  & = z^2 \\
	(2i)^2 + (2j)^2 + (2k)^2 &= z^2 \\
	4i^2 + 4j^2 + 4k^2 & = z^2 \\
	4(i^2 + j^2 + k^2) & =  z^2
	\end{align}
$$

$z^2$ can be divided by 4, then z can be divided by 2, so z is even.

Now, we prove $z$ is even implies $w$, $x$, and $y$ are even by contradiction. We assume the claim is false; that is, there exist 4 positive integers, $z$ is even, at least one of $w$, $x$ and $y$ is odd, that $w^2 + x^2 + y^2 = z^2$.

We can write $z$ as $2l$. There are 3 cases:

1. one of $w$, $x$, $y$ is even, say $w$, then we can write them as $2i+1$, $2j$ and $2k$, then

	$$\begin{align}
		w^2 + x^2 + y^2  & = z^2 \\
		(2i+1)^2 + (2j)^2 + (2k)^2 &= (2l)^2 \\
		4i^2 + 4i + 1 + 4j^2 + 4k^2 & = 4l^2 \\
		4(i^2 + i + j^2 + k^2) + 1 & =  4l^2
	\end{align}
	$$

	Right side of the equation can be divided by 4, while left side cannot, we found a contradiction.

2. two of $w$, $x$, $y$ are even, say $w$ and $x$, then we can write them as $2i+1$, $2j+1$ and $2k$, then

	$$\begin{align}
		w^2 + x^2 + y^2  & = z^2 \\
		(2i+1)^2 + (2j+1)^2 + (2k)^2 &= (2l)^2 \\
		4i^2 + 4i + 1 + 4j^2 + 4j + 1 + 4k^2 & = 4l^2 \\
		4(i^2 + i + j^2 + j + k^2) + 2 & =  4l^2
	\end{align}
	$$

	Right side of the equation can be divided by 4, while left side cannot, we found a contradiction.

2. $w$, $x$, $y$ are all even, then we can write them as $2i+1$, $2j+1$ and $2k+1$, then

	$$\begin{align}
		w^2 + x^2 + y^2  & = z^2 \\
		(2i+1)^2 + (2j+1)^2 + (2k+1)^2 &= (2l)^2 \\
		4i^2 + 4i + 1 + 4j^2 + 4j + 1 + 4k^2 + 4k + 1 & = 4l^2 \\
		4(i^2 + i + j^2 + j + k^2 + k) + 3 & =  4l^2
	\end{align}
	$$

	Right side of the equation can be divided by 4, while left side cannot, we found a contradiction.

We found contradictions in all 3 cases, so $z$ is even implies $w$, $x$, and $y$ are even. $\quad\blacksquare$

For information about citing these materials or our Terms of Use, visit: http://ocw.mit.edu/terms. 
